Day-2: File Ownership and Access Control

Topics: chown, chgrp, ownership + permissions

Part A — Ownership Investigation (10 Minutes)
Create a directory named ownership_lab.
Inside it, create:
incident_report.txt
network.log
credentials.txt
Display the detailed information for these files.
For each file, identify:
Owner
Group
Owner permissions
Group permissions
Others permissions
Determine the UID and GID of the current user.
Compare the UID/GID information with the ownership displayed for the newly created files.
Explain the difference between file ownership and file permissions.

Part B — chown: Changing Ownership (15 Minutes)
Change the owner of incident_report.txt to alice.
Change the owner of network.log to bob.
Change the owner of credentials.txt to charlie.
Verify each change.
Try changing the owner of a file to another user without using sudo. Record the result.
Explain why an ordinary user is generally not permitted to transfer file ownership to another user.
Using a single command, configure:
incident_report.txt
Owner : alice
Group : security
Verify the resulting ownership.

Part C — chgrp: Changing Group Ownership (15 Minutes)
Change the group ownership of network.log to developers.
Change the group ownership of credentials.txt to security.
Verify the changes.
Display the group memberships of alice, bob, and charlie.
Log in as alice and create a file named alice_report.txt.
Attempt to change the group of alice_report.txt to security.
Attempt to change its group to developers.
Compare the results.
Explain how a user's group membership affects their ability to change the group ownership of a file they own.


Part D — Ownership + Permission Investigation (20 Minutes)

Configure:

-rw-r----- alice security incident_report.txt
Identify what operations are available to:
alice
charlie
bob

A user who belongs to neither security nor the file owner
charlie belongs to security. Test whether Charlie can:
Read incident_report.txt
Modify incident_report.txt
Delete incident_report.txt

Record the result of each operation.

Change the permissions to:
-rw-rw----

Repeat the test as charlie.

Explain why Charlie's access changed even though the owner and group of the file did not change.
Remove bob from the security group.

Without changing the file's ownership or permissions, test Bob's access again.

Explain why Bob's effective permissions changed.


Refer: https://towardsdev.com/ownership-groups-in-linux-chown-chgrp-a2ae60b53083

"Practice isn't the thing you do once you're good. It's the thing you do that makes you good." — Malcolm Gladwell